.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac
.TH SSCONVERT 1 "2020-04-19" "gnumeric" "GNOME"
.SH NAME
ssconvert \- a command line spreadsheet format converter

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBssconvert\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIinfile\fR \fIoutfile\fR
.P
\fBssconvert\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB\-\-merge\-to\fR \fIoutfile\fR \fIinfile1\fR \fIinfile2\fR \fB...\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBssconvert\fR is a command line utility to convert spreadsheet files
between various spreadsheet file formats. It is a companion utility to
\fBGnumeric\fR, the powerful spreadsheet program created by the GNOME
project.

\fBssconvert\fR accepts either file names or URIs as \fIinfile\fR
\fIoutfile\fR. The special URIs \fIfd://0\fR and \fIfd://1\fR can be
used for standard input and standard output respectively.

.SH OPTIONS
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax, with single
letter options starting with a single dash (`-') and longer options
starting with two dashes (`--').

.SS "Main options"
.TP
.B \-\-recalc
Recalculate all cells before writing the result.
.TP
.B \-\-set \fICELL=CONTENTS\fR
Set the value of \fICELL\fR to \fICONTENTS\fR.  To
put an expression in a cell, add an extra =, for example \-\-set "A11==A10+1".
This option may be repeated as many times as needed.  The workbook will be
recalculated after all cells have been set, provided that the workbook is
set for automatic recalculation.  If not, recalculation can be forced
with \-\-recalc.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Be slightly more verbose about what is going on.
.TP
.B \-\-list\-exporters
List the available exporters (file formats that can be written).
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-export\-type=\fIID\fR
Specify which exporter to use; see below for a list. This is only
necessary when the right format does not follow from the output file
name.  The list of available export formats can be generated using the
\-\-list\-exporters option.  However, when image export is requested
using the \-\-export\-graphs option, the list of image formats should be
consulted instead.  That list can be generated using the
\-\-list\-image\-formats option.
.TP
.B \-O, \-\-export\-options=\fIoptionsstring\fR
Specify parameters for the chosen exporter.
\fIoptionsstring\fR is a list of \fIparameter\fR=\fIvalue\fR pairs, separated
by spaces.
The parameter names and values allowed are specific to the exporter and are
documented below. Multiple parameters can be specified
.TP
.B \-\-export\-graphs
Export the graphs (or charts) inside the input spreadsheet to
numbered image files (SVG by default).  The list of available image
formats can be printed with \-\-list\-image-formats
.TP
.B \-\-list\-importers
List the available importers (file formats that can be read).
.B \-I, \-\-import\-type=\fIID\fR
Specify which importer to use; see below for a list. This is only
necessary when the right format does not follow from the input file
name.
.TP
.B \-\-list\-image\-formats
List the available image formats for graph export
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-import\-encoding=\fISTRING\fR
Specify an encoding for imported content.
.TP
.B \-M, \-\-merge\-to=\fIFILENAME\fR
Merge a collection of workbooks into one.  Sheet size will expand
to the largest in all the workbooks.  Names in the scope of
individual workbooks will end up in the scope of the merged
workbook.  The merge will be aborted if there are name conflicts.
.TP
.B \-S, \-\-export\-file\-per\-sheet
Export a file for each sheet if the exporter only supports one sheet at a
time.  The output filename is treated as a template in which sheet number
is substituted for %n, sheet name is substituted for %s, and sheet object
name is substituted for %o in case of graph export.  If there are no
substitutions, a default of ".%n" is added.

.SS "Help options"
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display ssconvert's version.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help, \-\-usage
Display a brief usage message.
.TP
.B \-\-help\-all
Show all help options.
.TP
.B \-\-help\-libspreadsheet
Show Gnumeric options.

.SH LIST OF IMPORTER/EXPORTER IDS
The following IDs can be can be used both for import (reading) and export
(writing).
.TP
.B Gnumeric_XmlIO:sax
Gnumeric's XML file format (*.gnumeric)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_OpenCalc:openoffice
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument" "OpenDocument"
or
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenOffice.org_Calc" "OpenOffice Calc"
(*.sxc, *.ods) format.
As an exporter, this is ODF/OpenOffice without foreign elements (*.ods).
.TP
.B Gnumeric_dif:dif
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_Interchange_Format" "Data Interchange Format"
(*.dif)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_paradox:paradox
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_%28database%29" "Paradox database"
or primary index file (*.db, *.px)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_stf:stf_assistant
Text (configurable)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_sylk:sylk
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiplan" "MultiPlan"
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SYmbolic_LinK_%28SYLK%29" "Symbolic Link (SYLK)"
(*.slk)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_Excel:xlsx
Microsoft Excel (tm) 2007 ("Office Open XML",
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XLSX" "OOXML"
) format

.SH LIST OF IMPORTANT IMPORTER IDS
.TP
.B Gnumeric_stf:stf_csvtab
Comma or tab separated values (CSV/TSV) (*.csv)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:html
HTML (*.html, *.htm)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_Excel:excel
Microsoft Excel (tm) (*.xls)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_Excel:excel_xml
Microsoft Excel (tm) 2003 SpreadsheetML

.SH LIST OF OTHER IMPORTER IDS
.TP
.B Gnumeric_QPro:qpro
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quattro_Pro" "Quattro Pro"
(*.wb1, *.wb2, *.wb3)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_applix:applix
Applix (*.as)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_lotus:lotus
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lotus_1-2-3" "Lotus 1-2-3"
(*.wk1, *.wks, *.123)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_mps:mps
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MPS_%28format%29" "MPS (Mathematical Programming System) format"
Linear programming and mixed integer programming file format (*.mps)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_oleo:oleo
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Oleo" "GNU Oleo"
(*.oleo)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_plan_perfect:pln
PlanPerfect Format (PLN)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_psiconv:psiconv
Psion (*.psisheet)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_sc:sc
SC/xspread
.TP
.B Gnumeric_xbase:xbase
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XBase" "xBase"
(*.dbf) file format

.SH LIST OF IMPORTANT EXPORTER IDS
.TP
.B Gnumeric_OpenCalc:odf
ODF/OpenOffice with foreign elements (*.ods)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_glpk:glpk
GLPK Linear Program Solver
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:html40
HTML 4.0 (*.html)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:html40frag
HTML (*.html) fragment
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:xhtml
XHTML (*.html)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:xhtml_range
XHTML range - for export to clipboard
.TP
.B Gnumeric_pdf:pdf_assistant
Portable Document Format (*.PDF)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_stf:stf_csv
Comma separated values (CSV)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_Excel:excel_dsf
Microsoft Excel (tm) 97/2000/XP & 5.0/95

.SH LIST OF OTHER EXPORTER IDS
.TP
.B Gnumeric_Excel:excel_biff7
Microsoft Excel (tm) 5.0/95
.TP
.B Gnumeric_Excel:excel_biff8
Microsoft S Excel (tm) 97/2000/XP
.TP
.B Gnumeric_GnomeGlossary:po
Gnome Glossary PO file format
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:html32
HTML 3.2 (*.html)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:latex
LaTeX 2e (*.tex)
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:latex_table
LaTeX 2e (*.tex) table fragment
.TP
.B Gnumeric_html:roff
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troff" "TROFF"
(*.me) format.
.TP
.B Gnumeric_lpsolve:lpsolve
.URL "http://sourceforge.net/projects/lpsolve/" "LPSolve"
Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) solver

.SH OPTIONS FOR THE PORTABLE DOCUMENT FORMAT (*.pdf) EXPORTER

.TP
.B sheet
Name of the workbook sheet to operate on.
You can specify several sheets by repeating this option.
This is ignored if the \fBobject\fR option is given.

.TP
.B active-sheet
Select the active sheet to operate on.  The value for this option is
irrelevant, but the equal sign is mandatory.

.TP
.B object
Name of the sheet object to print. If this option is given any \fBsheet\fR option is ignored.
Only the first \fBobject\fR given is exported.

.TP
.B paper
Paper size. Valid values include "\fBA4\fR" for ISO A4 and
"\fBna_letter_8.5x11in\fR" for US Letter. If an individual graph is specified through the
\fBobject\fR option, then a paper size of "\fBfit\fR" reduces the size of the paper to the
size of the graph.
.\" FIXME Is there a convenient way to list all valid paper sizes?
.\" It looks like at least the values from plugins/excel/ms-excel-read.c's
.\" paper_size_table[] are supported.

.SH OPTIONS FOR THE CONFIGURABLE TEXT (*.txt) EXPORTER
.\" Cf. "g_object_class_install_property" calls in src/stf-export.c

.TP
.B sheet
Name of the workbook sheet to operate on.
You can specify several sheets by repeating this option.

.TP
.B active-sheet
Select the active sheet to operate on.  The value for this option is
irrelevant, but the equal sign is mandatory.

.TP
.B eol
End Of Line convention; how lines are terminated.
"\fBunix\fR" for linefeed,
"\fBmac\fR" for carriage return;
"\fBwindows\fR" for carriage return plus linefeed.

.TP
.B charset
The character encoding of the output. Defaults to UTF-8.

.TP
.B locale
The locale to use for number and date formatting.
Defaults to the current locale as reported by \fBlocale\fR(1).
Consult \fBlocale \-a\fR output for acceptable values.

.TP
.B quote
The character or string used for quoting fields. Defaults to "\fB\\"\fR"
(quotation mark / double quote).

.TP
.B separator
The string used to separate fields. Defaults to space.

.TP
.B format
How cells should be formatted.
Acceptable values:
"\fBautomatic\fR" (apply automatic formatting; default),
"\fBraw\fR" (output data raw, unformatted), or
"\fBpreserve\fR" (preserve the formatting from the source document).

This deals with the difference between a cell's contents and the way those
contents are formatted.

Consider a cell in a Gnumeric input document that was
input as "4/19/73" in a US locale, with a format set to "d-mmm-yyyy" and
thus formatted as "19-Apr-1973".

With the default \fBformat\fR setting of "\fBautomatic\fR" it will be output
as "1973/04/19". With "\fBpreserve\fR", the formatting will be preserved and
it will be output as "19-Apr-1973". With "\fBraw\fR" it will be output as
"26773" (Gnumeric's internal representation: days since an epoch).

.TP
.B transliterate-mode
How to handle unrepresentable characters (characters that cannot be
represented in the chosen output character set).
Acceptable values:
"\fBtransliterate\fR", or
"\fBescape\fR".

.TP
.B quoting-mode
When does data need to be quoted?
"\fBnever\fR",
"\fBauto\fR" (puts quotes where needed), or
"\fBalways\fR". Defaults to "\fBauto\fR".

.TP
.B quoting-on-whitespace
Controls whether initial or terminal whitespace forces quoting. Defaults to
\fBTRUE\fR.


.\".SH EXIT STATUS
.\".SH RETURN VALUE
.\".SH ERRORS
.\".SH ENVIRONMENT
.\".SH FILES
.\".SH VERSIONS
.\".SH CONFORMING TO
.\".SH NOTES
.\".SH BUGS
.\".SH USAGE
.SH EXAMPLE
To convert the Gnumeric file \fIfoo.gnumeric\fR to a Microsoft Excel(TM)
format file
\fIfoo.xls\fR:
.PP
\fBssconvert\fR \fIfoo.gnumeric\fR \fIfoo.xls\fR
.PP
The export format can be specified explicitly, to override the default
(which is based on the file extension):
.PP
\fBssconvert\fR \fB\-\-export\-type=\fRGnumeric_stf:stf_csv\fR \fIfoo.xls\fR
\fIfoo.txt\fR
.PP
To convert an Excel format file \fIstatfuns.xls\fR to a text file,
specifying the semicolon as the separator character:
.PP
\fBssconvert\fR \fB-O 'separator=; format=raw'\fR \fIsamples/excel/statfuns.xls\fR \fIstatfuns.txt\fR
.PP
To export the charts from the input file \fIinput.gnumeric\fR to numbered
SVG files:
.PP
\fBssconvert\fR \fB\-\-export\-graphs\fR \fIinput.gnumeric\fR \fI'output.%n.svg'\fR
.PP
To export the charts from the input file \fIinput.gnumeric\fR to numbered
PNG files:
.PP
\fBssconvert\fR \fB\-\-export\-type=png\fR \fB\-\-export\-graphs\fR \fIinput.gnumeric\fR \fI'output.%n.png'\fR
.PP

.SH LICENSE

\fBssconvert\fR is licensed under the terms of the General Public
License (GPL), version 2 or 3. For information on this license look at the
source code that came with the software or see the
.URL "http://www.gnu.org" "GNU project page" .

.SH COPYRIGHT

The copyright on the \fBGnumeric\fR software and source code is held
by the individual authors as is documented in the source code.

.SH AUTHOR

\fBssconvert\fR's primary author is Jody Goldberg <jody@gnome.org>;
\fBssconvert\fR builds on the \fBGnumeric\fR codebase.

The initial version of this manpage was written by J.H.M. Dassen (Ray)
<jdassen@debian.org>.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gnumeric(1),
.BR ssdiff(1),
.BR ssgrep(1),
.BR ssindex(1)

.URL "http://www.gnome.org/projects/gnumeric/" "The Gnumeric Homepage" .

.URL "http://www.gnome.org/" "The GNOME project page" .
