.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac
.TH SSCONVERT 1 "2009-01-02" gnumeric "GNOME"
.SH NAME
ssconvert \- a command line spreadsheet format converter

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBssconvert\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIinfile\fR \fIoutfile\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBssconvert\fR is a command line utility to convert spreadsheet files
between various spreadsheet file formats. It is a companion utility to
\fBGnumeric\fR, the powerful spreadsheet program created by the GNOME
project.

\fBssconvert\fR accepts either file names or URIs as \fIinfile\fR
\fIoutfile\fR.  The special URIs \fIfd://0\fR and \fIfd://1\fR can be
used for standard input and standard output respectively.


.\".SH RETURN VALUE
.\".SH EXIT STATUS
.SH OPTIONS
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax, with single
letter options starting with a single dash (`-') and longer options
starting with two dashes (`--').

.SS "Main options"
.TP
.B \-\-list\-exporters
List the available exporters (file formats)
.TP
.B \-\-list\-importers
List the available importers (file formats)
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-import\-encoding=\fISTRING\fR
Specify an encoding for imported content.  This is only necessary when
the right encoding does not follow from the input file name.
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-export\-type=\fIID\fR
Specify which exporter to use; see below for a list.  This is only
necessary when the right encoding does not follow from the output file
name.
.TP
.B \-O, \-\-export\-options=\fIoptionsstring\fR
Specify parameters for the chosen exporter.
\fIoptionsstring\fR is a list of \fIparameter\fR=\fIvalue\fR pairs, separated
by spaces.
The parameter names and values allowed are specific to the exporter and are
documented below. Multiple parameters can be specified
.TP
.B \-\-recalc
Recalculate all formulas before writing.

.SS "Help options"
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Display ssconvert's version
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help, \-\-usage
Display a brief usage message

.SS "Path options"
.TP
.B \-L, \-\-lib\-dir=STRING
Set the root library directory
.TP
.B \-D, \-\-data\-dir=STRING
Adjust the root data directory

.SH LIST OF IMPORTANT IDS
.TP
Gnumeric_XmlIO:sax
Gnumeric's XML file format
.TP
Gnumeric_Excel:excel_dsf
Microsoft Excel (tm) 97/2000/XP & 5.0/95 format
.TP
Gnumeric_Excel:xlsx
Microsoft Excel (tm) 2007 ("Office Open XML",
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XLSX" "OOXML"
) format
.TP
Gnumeric_pdf:pdf_assistant
Portable Document Format
.TP
Gnumeric_stf:stf_assistant
Text export (configurable) (*.txt)
.TP
Gnumeric_stf:stf_csv
Comma Separated Values

.SH LIST OF LESS IMPORTANT IDS
.TP
.\"Gnumeric_GnomeGlossary:po    | Gnome Glossary PO file format
Gnumeric_sylk:sylk
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SYmbolic_LinK_(SYLK)" "SYmbolic LinK (SYLK)"
or Multiplan format.
.TP
Gnumeric_Excel:excel_biff8
Microsoft Excel (tm) 97/2000/XP format
.TP
Gnumeric_Excel:excel_biff7
Microsoft Excel (tm) 5.0/95 format
.TP
Gnumeric_dif:dif
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_Interchange_Format" "Data Interchange Format"
(*.dif)
.TP
Gnumeric_html:roff
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troff" "TROFF"
(*.me) format.
.TP
Gnumeric_html:latex_table
LaTeX 2e (*.tex) table fragment
.TP
Gnumeric_html:latex
LaTeX 2e (*.tex)
.TP
Gnumeric_html:xhtml_range
XHTML range - for export to clipboard
.TP
Gnumeric_html:xhtml
XHTML (*.html)
.TP
Gnumeric_html:html40frag
HTML (*.html) fragment
.TP
Gnumeric_html:html40
HTML 4.0 (*.html)
.TP
Gnumeric_html:html32
HTML 3.2 (*.html)
.TP
Gnumeric_OpenCalc:openoffice
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument" "OpenDocument"
or
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenOffice.org_Calc" "OpenOffice Calc"
(*.ods) format
.TP
Gnumeric_paradox:paradox
.URL "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_(database)" "Paradox database"
(*.db) format

.SH OPTIONS FOR THE PORTABLE DOCUMENT FORMAT (*.pdf) EXPORTER

.TP
sheet
Name of the workbook sheet to operate on.

.TP
paper
Paper size. Valid values include "\fBA4\fR" for ISO A4 and
"\fBna_letter_8.5x11in\fR" for US Letter.
.\" FIXME Is there a convenient way to list all valid paper sizes?
.\" It looks like at least the values from plugins/excel/ms-excel-read.c's
.\" paper_size_table[] are supported.

.SH OPTIONS FOR THE CONFIGURABLE TEXT (*.txt) EXPORTER

.TP
sheet
Name of the workbook sheet to operate on.

.TP
eol
End Of Line convention; how lines are terminated.
"\fBunix\fR" for linefeed,
"\fBmac\fR" for carriage return;
"\fBwindows\fR" for carriage return plus linefeed.

.TP
charset
The character encoding of the output. Defaults to UTF-8.

.TP
locale

.TP
quote
The character or string used for quoting fields. Defaults to "\fB\\"\fR"
(quotation mark / double quote).

.TP
separator
The string used to separate fields. Defaults to space.

.TP
format
Acceptable values: 
"\fBautomatic\fR", 
"\fBraw\fR", or 
"\fBpreserve\fR".

.TP
transliterate-mode
How to handle characters that cannot be represented in the chosen output
character set.
Acceptable values:
"\fBtransliterate\fR", or 
"\fBescape\fR".

.TP
quoting-mode
When does data need to be quoted? 
"\fBnever\fR",
"\fBauto\fR" (puts quotes where needed), or 
"\fBalways\fR". Defaults to "\fBnever\fR".

.TP
quoting-on-whitespace
Controls whether initial or terminal whitespace forces quoting. Defaults to
\fBTRUE\fR.


.\".SH USAGE
.SH EXAMPLES
To convert the gnumeric file \fIfoo.gnumeric\fR to a Microsoft Excel(TM)
format file
\fIfoo.xls\fR:
.PP
\fBssconvert\fR \fB\-\-export\-type=\fRGnumeric_Excel:excel_dsf\fR \fIfoo.gnumeric\fR \fIfoo.xls\fR
.PP
To convert an Excel format file \fIstatfuns.xls\fR to a text file,
specifying the semicolon as the separator character:
.PP
\fBssconvert\fR \fB-O 'separator=; format=raw'\fR \fIsamples/excel/statfuns.xls\fR \fIstatfuns.txt\fR
.PP

.\".SH ENVIRONMENT
.\".SH DIAGNOSTICS
.\".SH SECURITY
.\".SH CONFORMING TO
.\".SH NOTES
.\".SH BUGS
.\"
.\"\fBssconvert\fR is a recent addition to Gnumeric. Its main limitation is
.\"that there is currently no provision for importer or exporter specific flags.

.SH LICENSE

\fBssconvert\fR is licensed under the terms of the General Public
License (GPL), version 2. For information on this license look at the
source code that came with the software or see the
.URL "http://www.gnu.org" "GNU project page" .

.SH COPYRIGHT

The copyright on the \fBgnumeric\fR software and source code is held
by the individual authors as is documented in the source code.

.SH AUTHOR

\fBssconvert\fR's primary author is Jody Goldberg <jody@gnome.org>;
\fBssconvert\fR builds on the \fBgnumeric\fR codebase.

The initial version of this manpage was written by J.H.M. Dassen (Ray)
<jdassen@debian.org>.

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgnumeric\fR(1)

.URL "http://www.gnome.org/projects/gnumeric/" "The Gnumeric Homepage" .

.URL "http://www.gnome.org/" "The GNOME project page" .
